This video is brought to you by Warby Parker order five pairs of glasses and try
them on for free. This is the box they send you. It contains glasses,
just head to Warby parker.com/biographics to order your free home
Tryon more on them in a bit.
Today's protagonist is generally similar Francisco Franco who ruled Spain from
1939 to 1975,
with the title of K leading the longest running dictatorship in Europe,
he is best remembered as the leader of the nationalist faction,
the military insurgency,
which opposed the Republican government in the Spanish civil war.
But how did he rise through the ranks and seize control of a movement that he
had not initiated? How did he rule Spain after the war?
And how did he orchestrate the transition back to monarchy?
What we're going to cover these and other aspects of Franco's life in today's
episode of biographics. But before we get started a disclaimer,
an extensive account of Francisco Franco's life implies telling the history of a
complex conflict, a whole nation for more than 40 years.
So we are going to skip some chunks in today's video.
If you think we've missed an important event,
please do post your suggestion in the comment below and make sure that you name
the protagonists or protagonists of these events.
And we might consider them for future videos.
Francisco Franco Bahaman was born on the 4th of December,
1892 in the town of Ferrell in Northwestern, Spain.
He had two brothers and one sister born into a family that were generations had
served the one's glorious Spanish Navy sister.
Pilar described him as very quiet and into serious boy, physically,
very thin in, in his childhood Francisco to a obsessions,
his studies and his mother with whom he had a very tight relationship.
Francisco's mother Maria de was an Austria and devout woman who imbued Francisco
with a deep faith in religion.
And in the importance of the church in Spanish society,
his father was more interested in alcohol and extramarital affairs lifestyle,
which Franco perceived as bodged.
And he actively avoided throughout his life in 1898,
the once mighty Spanish empire was reduced to a handful of colonies following
the defeat in the Hispanic American war, which cost them Cuba, Puerto Rico,
and the Philippines,
the remnants of the defeated Spanish fleet returned to Ferrell marking a period
of mourn for the whole community. And especially for the sick year old,
this may have instilled in him a desire to restore the glory of the empire.
The other effect of the destruction of the fleet was a decline in available
spots for the Naval academy. For several years,
the Navy would've been Francisco's natural destination,
but he had to settle for an army career. Instead in 1906,
aged 14 Francisco enlisted in the Toledo army academy.
The new cadet was so small, his voice.
So shrill that he quickly became victim of the AC Academy's bullies.
His frame was so frail that the instructors had to modify his training rifle to
make it lighter, to carry Francisco made up for his physical shortcomings,
with determination and hard work.
Although he did not display particular leadership qualities.
He graduated in 1910,
modestly placed 251 out of 312 cadets. The Spanish military.
It was saturated with officers at that time and opportunities for career
progression were scar in 1912.
Francisco took the calculated move of volunteering for a post in Spanish,
Morocco. The last colony in the hopes of progressing through the Army's ranks,
his experiences in Africa would be key to shaping his later life.
He later declared without Africa. I could not explain who I am.
The kingdom of Spain was engaged in a brutal colonial war against the rebel
tribes of the R mountain range in this conflict,
lefthand and Franco displayed qualities so far kept hidden tenacity and physical
courage.
Lefthand and Franco was in charge of a company of Moroccan colonial troops that
were loyal to the Spanish crown.
He was able to maintain a ruthless discipline amongst his soldiers even went
under heavy. He fire on one occasion.
One of his troops refused to eat his rations and threw them at another.
Officer Franco had been executed by firing squad.
It is alleged that he applied this ruthlessness also against civilians using
terror tactics to que the rebellion, the officers of the Spanish army in Africa.
At that time when nicknames Navia, Dylan wor,
which can be translated as the grooms or boyfriends of lady death.
This was because of the high casualty rates amongst their wrecks.
Franco apparently disregarded the fear of death.
Often leading from the fronts with almost suicidal attacks against entrenched
rebels in 1917,
Franco had already been promoted to major and was ordered back to Spain to break
a strike of coal miners in the Northern region notorious during a Stan,
ofdo the capital of the region. He got engaged with common polo.
This was despite opposition from her family of wealthy merchants back to Morocco
in 1918. On the 28th of June,
he was shot in the stomach and almost certain appointment with lady death while
bleeding out on a stretcher. He called out to a doctor,
but he was refused treatment a to the doctor.
It would've been futile Franco then grabbed a rifle and pointed it to the
doctor, threatening to shoot him. If he was not treated,
the medic changed his mind and had him evacuated to a field hospital against all
odds. He fully recovered. The native troops, followed him with blinds loyalty.
After that in October of 1920 Franco was second in commands of the Terio to
extranas the Spanish foreign Legion recently founded by L Colonel Milan
astray.
Milan introduced as such the credo of the CEO death in combat is the greatest
honor.
You die only once death arrives without pain and is not so terrible as it seems,
the most horrible thing is to live as a coward.
The Terio became known for its effectiveness, courage and brutality.
One of Franco soldiers described as such their operations. When it attacked.
The Teo knew no limits to its vengeance when its left a village,
nothing remains but fires. And the corpses of men, women,
and children in 1923,
Franco became commander of the Terio shining for his strategic and
administrative ability. On the 23rd of October,
he married Carmen in ado with a representative of king Alfonso,
the 13th present at the wedding.
They would have only one daughter car seater born the following year.
After 14 years of service in Morocco,
the ones mediocre left tenant at pro so quickly that he returned to Spain,
a Brigadier general age 33.
He was the youngest general in Europe since Napoleon. Hello.
He had also become something of a celebrity frequenting elite circles,
and even starring as himself in the movie laal Kasad of 1926.
This curious film dealing with a real life divorce case,
featured many intellectuals politicians and military leaders of the time
starring alongside Franco can also be seen old commander Milan astray who had
later become nationalist propaganda chief during the civil war and even Miguel
Premo de Rivera, who is ruling Spain as a military dictator from 1923,
with the blessing of the king Franco celebrity status.
And Carmen's connections gave them access to the most elite in Spain,
but he did not enjoy their pleasures.
He preferred to relish the traditional and dote values that he had learned from
his mother,
which he imparted to his cadets at the military academy and Zaragoza.
But despite his best efforts for a return to tradition,
Spanish society was changing around the young general
From the bottom up Spanish society was shaken by the rise of leftist movement,
supposing the traditional pillars of the monarchy,
the Catholic church and the owners of larger states at the top prima Rivera's
dictatorship.
It was failing due to his ill-conceived economic policies resulting in high
taxation, unsustainable public debt and rising inflation.
He was forced to resign in January of 1930 in 1931,
Alfonso the 13th agreed to democratic elections,
which saw the victory of the left in April, the king abdicated,
the Spanish Republic, it was founded and a new constitution was ratified.
According to Franco's niece.
This was a personal catastrophe for him as he did not believe in de nor in a
multi-part system, but the new government was a fragile one.
And in November of 1933,
it was replaced by a conservative coalition who appointed general Franco as
commander inchi of the army.
The left continued to call civil unrest though in 1934,
another massive strike of coal miners in Astoria took place.
Franco was tasked with restoring order in the area.
He commanded the Terio to take charge of the strikers.
2000 protestors were killed or wounded, many more deported to Morocco,
but his actions had the unintended consequence of rallying.
The left-wing parties into a strong coalition called the people's front.
In February of 1936, new elections were convened this time.
It was the leftist people's front who secured a victory. The new insured,
the conservative generals were not close to the seat of power.
Franco was dispatched to 10 reef in the Canary islands,
2000 kilometers from Madrid.
The government kept close tabs on him by wire tapping his phone and checking his
mail. In the meantime,
unrest and violence were spiraling outta control in the country.
The supporters of the leftist government soon gave way to excesses,
especially against Catholic institutions,
churches were being burned and priests were murdered behind the scenes.
A group of generals was plotting a military coup Franco did not get involved at
this stage. Coldly calculating the risks involved,
the leaders of the plot were two generals, a and Moola Mola.
The chief planner of the coup had a scheme to involve Franco in the Bando NA or
nationalist forces.
The plan involved dispatching a plane from London to the canaries to then
smuggle Franco into Morocco, where he would lead the Terio to join the action.
While the plane was flying Toran Canaria on the 11th of July,
Franco sent an encrypted myth to refusing, to participate in the coup,
but on the 13th right wing politician Calello was murdered by the Republican
police,
which gave to the insurgents the motivation to proceed with their plans at all
costs Franco. He was finally convinced on July the 19th of 1936.
He traveled in civilian disguised to the Moroccan colony,
the African R numbering 30,000 swore loyalty to Franco into his course,
but how could he ferry such an army all the way to Spain when the Navy was loyal
to the Republic and was patrolling the straits of Gibralter.
This is when he secured help from fascist Italy and Nazi Germany,
the Italian and Germany air forces came to help Franco by organizing 800
flights, they managed to ferry forces to mainland Spain.
The hopes of the insurgents for a quick resolution of the co did not
materialize. What had just started was the long and bloody conflict.
The Spanish civil war, the insurgents also had a leadership problem.
Their commander general Sani had died in a plane crash on the 20th of July.
The ING replaced by the military hunter only formally led by the elder general
have an as in the meanwhile,
Franco had reached civilian and quickly bled his army Northwood facing only the
resistance of civilians.
His African army soon reached about Yas near the Portuguese border.
After reaching the city Franco embarked in a political cleansing of the area as
witnessed by Portuguese journalists, Marion Neves,
hundreds of prisoners were rounded up in the local bull fighting ring and execut
by firing squad. Franco continued his March towards Madrid,
but in September he ordered a diversion to Toledo south of the capital in
Toledo,
a small Garrison of nationalists was besieged by the Republican army inside the
ALZA that the castle,
which housed the very military academy in which young Francisco had graduated
Franco's army defeated the Republicans, but he only joins them.
The following day, the 27th of September in full view of the news cameras,
he had realized that this was more of a PR event than a simple military victory
tanto was not only home to the military academy.
It was also the religious capital of Spain by appearing as the liberator of
Toledo, Franco had portrayed himself as the defender of Spanish,
traditional institutions,
one tradit institution that you don't want to defend is the prices at boutique.
I wear shops, not a great thing,
but that was a great transition into today's sponsor Warby Parker,
who I want to tell you a bit about right now. In fact,
I actually want your input because I just got my box a free Tryon from
Warby Parker. I got five pairs of glasses to try on for five days.
Obviously they're not to my prescription yet,
but I'm gonna rotate them through this ad. And I would love your feedback.
I will probably take it to heart, use the comments below. Okay. So pair one,
what you do is you go online and you take a quick quiz and you get some
recommendations to your face and your style pair.
Two glasses start such as $95, including prescription lenses,
which is a super competitive price.
And you also get all the good stuff like anti GLA and anti scratch pair three.
You can even try them on virtually before you get the box.
If you got an iPhone 10, so that it's handy, pair four,
all of these glasses that I'm trying on today, they look and feel great.
You know, I'm not a style expert. So let me know what you think below,
but you can tell that these are great glasses of worn glasses for a very long
time. Finally pair five, but yes,
Warby Parker order five pairs of glasses and try them on for five days,
no obligation to buy. If you don't want to ships free,
just head to Warby parker.com/biographics in order to try your free
home. Try on let's get back to today's video.
On the same evening, Francisco traveled to the city of Casares here,
general Mullan astray in general,
Yago announced that now the whole nationalist army was under the so command of
general Franco. So far,
Francisco had been leading only the African army in the south while general
Mullo was in command in the north. All of the generals,
except for the odd Cabernets thought that a unified leadership would improve
their war efforts. Franco was one of the candidates,
but it was not sure about taking the mantle.
It was thanks to the scheming of his own brother asked that he eventually
accepted Nicholas first pressured yawe into convincing Francisco to lead all
armies. Yawe issued a vague threat to Franco. If he didn't accept the role,
the hunter would appoint somebody else.
Cola also orchestrated a meeting of eight leading generals,
including Franco in Sal on the 28th of September, 1936.
The purpose of the meeting was to decide whether to concentrate on one single
person,
both military and political leadership of the Spanish state during the civil
war, except for two generals.
Everybody voted for Franco to be the leader of the Spanish state term,
which indicated the nationalist control territory Franco now had become the
generally Sumo of all armed forces and head of the government.
He took on the title of cord and ancient style for leader. In theory,
he only had a mandate for the duration of the war,
but Nicholas cleverly redacted,
the official bulletin bearing this decision so that this time limitation was
omitted. The Franco brothers had outsmarted the other generals,
real co within a co,
which ensured total power a life to the once reluctant insurgent
By October of 1936 nationalist forces were in control of roughly one third of
Spanish territory, mainly in the west and north of the country. But Madrid,
it was still outta Franco's reach despite intensive air and artillery bombings.
At this time, the Republican government secured support from Stalin.
Now every side of the conflict could rely on help from powerful dictatorships.
This war would not spare civilians.
There was a total war in which many of the horrific tactics of world war two
would be tested. Atrocities were perpetrated on a massive scale on both sides,
Franco and the other generals enacted a policy of purging captured cities.
Following the example of bad OS,
the Gans were also active in executing members of the clergy,
national prisoners, nationalists sympathizers,
and even themselves as a result of inviting among disparate factions.
Most notably in Kaun, it is estimated that by the end of the war,
the nationalists had executed 75,000 people compared to 55,000 murdered
by the Republicans in February, 1937,
Franco attempted to take Madrid by frontal assault in the battle of Iran river,
but he was starved by the international brigades of foreign volunteers.
It is resting to note that 5,000 Germans and 3000 Italians fought against Franco
joining the international brigades in support of the Republic.
These brigades were 60,000 strong at their peak in March.
Franco approached the capital from the Northeast capturing Guha first,
then Italian court took the city and then moved quickly to Madrids,
but were repelled by a Republican and via tank counter attack.
Operations progressed for the nationalists in the north, in August, 1937.
They captured the Northern stronghold of Santa and dare with help from Italian,
regular army and black shirts.
This helped consolidate their territories in the north. In the meantime,
the German condo Legion and the fascist air force had been perpetrating.
The first large carpet bombings of civilian targets over iRANO Barcelona,
Madrid, and most notably GU on the 26th of April, 1937.
But all in all despite decisive support from his allies Franco's progress was
slow. German leadership was frustrated by this and suspected.
It was a calculated move on his side.
Franco's strategy was to firmly consolidate his own political power before
answering on new territories, the situation for the Republicans,
it became dire in the second half of 1938 in July,
they engaged the nationalists in a protracted battle on the river Ebro in the
Northeast.
It lasted 113 days and claims more than 13,000 casualties on both sides.
The nationalists 600,000 strong could take the hit,
but the Republican less so in September of 1938,
the international brigades withdrew from Spain while mu sent even more aircraft
and artillery Franco on the 26th of January, 1939,
Barcelona fells and the nationalists, the president of the Republic,
Manuel AZAYA fled to France on the 27th of February British prime minister,
Neville Chamberlain was the first European democratic leader to recognize
Franco's government as legitimate on the same day,
AZAYA resigned in by the 1st of April, all Republican forces had capitulated.
That was the end of the war.
Half a million people had died 2% of the total Spanish population,
but the death toll, wasn't gonna stop there as, so ruler,
dictator or Cardillo of the Spanish state Francisco Franco could not tolerate
dissent. After the war had ended.
He continued his policy of purging his country of enemies of his regime via
executions rules by military tribunals sources differ,
but it is alleged that between 30,200 hundred thousand dissidents were executed
by Franco's regime.
Following the beginning of world war II in Europe,
there was a debate as to whether Spain should join the access powers on the 23rd
of October, 1940 Franco and Hitler met in Southern France,
Franco owed much the Germans, but during that meeting,
he did not commit to active participation in the war.
The decision was considered a wise one and defended by Francoist supporters over
time,
the Spanish military and industrial capabilities had been exhausted by the civil
war and they were not in shape for fighting another conflict. However,
a member of V rip Andros staff interviewed by the BBC reported that there had
been a previous meeting in Berlin ribbon.
Trump had met with Franco's foreign affairs minister, Sorano sun,
the minister proposed to join the axis in exchange for a large chunk of north
African territory to rebuild the Spanish embar. But at that time,
the Germans had not been impressed by the offer at that meeting in France.
Again,
Franco offered his participation in the war in exchange for all the French
Morocco ger and to N look could not accept these demands.
And the negotiations did not progress the fear he was furious.
This is when he famously said that it'd rather have four teeth pulled out than
another talk with Franco later in the war,
Franco was astute enough to maintain an equidistant neutrality with both access
and ally powers. For example, on the one hand,
he allowed pilots downed over Spanish territory to rejoin their countries and he
never made a move on Gibralter. On the other hand,
he allowed Italian Navy frogman.
He launched raids on Gibralter from Spanish ports by 1941,
he was maintaining good trade relations with the us and the UK.
But in that summer,
he allowed a contingent of 47,000 volunteers to join operation Barbara Rosa,
a against the Soviet union.
This contingent known as led AUL law blue division was recalled in October of
1943,
when it was clear that the war on the Eastern front was a lost cause for the
access powers.
This marked Franco's opportunistic shift towards the allies and the latter part
of the war
After the war Franco came under considerable pressure to restore the monarchy.
In 1947,
Franco announced a referendum to let the Spanish people site the vote confirmed
a preference for the monarchy. However,
the ever astute Franco while accepting the decision declared himself as lifetime
regions with the privilege of appointing a further regions or a new king before
his death, following Alfonso, the 13th in 1941,
the natural air to the throne was his third son,
Don qu of BN count of Barcelona.
Don Juan's older brothers had both renounced their right to the throne. Franco,
however, was under pressure from two components of his power base,
the Angus and the carless movements.
The Angus were anti monarchic while the carists supported another branch of the
bourbons Franko managed to placate both sides by selecting as future king.
The son of Don Juan named Juan Carlos reluctantly,
Don Juan agreed and did 1949,
the 10 year old Juan Carlos traveled to Madrid to begin his studies and train as
future Monarch, while planning for succession.
Franco had to think about rebuilding his country, which was weakened by the war.
And it was internationally isolated.
The international community sought suspicion in his regime,
remnants of fascist dictatorships from before the war. In fact,
Franco's regime did offer sanctuary to many former fascists to Nazis prime
example being SS commando OCO who managed a thriving business in
Madrid,
Franco embarked on a project to reconcile the opposing factions of the civil
war. The valley of the fallen. This is a monumental shrine built over 20 years.
Not far from Madrid. It is topped by a gigantic cross taller than the EAL tower.
And it houses the remnants of 50,000 nationalists and Republican soldiers.
Franco's intention was to commemorate the fall and heal the rift between enemies
and lay a promise not to engage in further civil conflict. The intention,
it was good. Although some sources claim that it was built,
thanks to forced labor of Republican prisoners looking externally Franco sought
to reestablish ties with the west has strong anti communism stands,
made him especially popular with the United had states and they backed Spain's
entry into the United nations. In 1950,
the relationship with the us was cemented in 1953,
Franco and president Eisenhower assigned an agreement that enabled the United
States to establish four military bases in Spain in return,
Spain was allowed to join NATO in the same year.
Franco got recognition by the smallest,
but by no means is powerless state in the world.
The Vatican Pope pirates the 12th,
granted Franco the right to appoint Spanish bishops from a list of several
candidates proposed by the holy sea. In 1956,
Morocco gained independence after being a French protectorate,
the Moroccan government demanded authority over the city, Ify territory.
One of the last remnants of Spanish possessions in north Africa,
Franco denied this concession as ever willing to preserve at least a slice of
the empire. Morocco reacted by creating a Moroccan liberation army,
which engaged the Spanish Garrison in a series of skirmishes.
It's all the general SMO ordered the intervention of paratroopers from the
motherlands the warp known as the Spanish forgotten war dragged on into 1958
with even the French army and air force. Joining Franco in February, by April,
the Moroccans had been defeated,
but Spain was pressured by the UN and the us to hands back the region of tough
fire ban retained control of city, if until 1969,
when it returns the former colony to Morocco following a UN resolution in 1963,
Franco had launched a program to soften his totalitarian him in a bid to further
improve relationships with the west. And in particular, the us,
he terminated the activities of military tribunals and had been replaced with
civilian courts.
He also shut down these special courts created to trial communists and free
masons. Other reforms included laws,
supporting a partial freedom of the press and freedom of worship until then the
regime meant actively suppressed the activities of all opposition left wing
parties, trade unions, and regional separatists who were very vocal,
especially in the bass country and Catalonia Franco's reforms.
And over years to the west had succeeded in stabilizing country and the economy
repression of dissenters. It was toned down,
but the generally SEMO still maintained a tough stance against separatism.
In August of 1965,
president Johnson asked for Spain's participation in the Vietnam war.
The Cillo rejected the invitation logically wary of engaging in gorilla warfare
in a far away jungle,
but he did order for a team of field medics to join the war. Meanwhile,
Franco his advisor, Louis Carrera,
Blanco and prince Juan Carlos were planning the succession.
The plan was to formally reveal the bourbon prince as future king in January of
1969. But this was delayed due to a series of terrorist attacks from the ETA,
the Basque separatists.
Finally in July Franco formally announced that Quan Carlos a BBO would succeed
him as head of king of Spain and a televised ceremony.
The prince swore an oath of loyalty to the Cordio and the nationalist movement
by 1973,
Franco was 81 and not able to handle the day-today administration of his
government.
He appointed Carrera Blago as prime minister maintaining an active role in some
foreign policy matters. Carrera Blanco's office was short,
lived on the 20th of December.
His car was blown up by the ETA and an explosion so violent that the car flew
over a church and landed on a second floor terrace.
And a car joke started to circulate in Spain,
which roughly translates to up with Spain up with Franco,
even higher than Carrero Blanco.
The subsequent crackdown on the ETA led to five terrorists being sentenced to
death and executed in September member of 1975.
These death penalties caused massive demonstrations in Madrid, Lisbon,
and the BAS city of San Sabastian as well as international condemnation,
Franco had firmly backed these ends, future executions, the dissent,
the demonstrations, even the jokes.
All these were clear signs that times had definitely changed since the
totalitarian days of the 90 forties and fifties, the regime,
regardless of the Cal DI's age, it was nearing its end,
Generally SI Francisco Franco Baha Hyundai had been a reluctant leader who had
gained control on the back of his brother's schemes.
He had been nostalgic of the empire ready to who bargain his country's entry
into world Wari to regain north Africa.
He had been the ruthless Cordio who did not tolerate opposition. And finally,
he had been the astute politician who had sought to bring stability to a divided
nation. Francisco Franco died on the 20th of November,
1975 of natural causes. His last words were reported as I,
I ask pardon of all my enemies, as I pardon with all my heart,
all those who declared themselves my enemy,
although I did not consider them to be so in his last conversation with prime
minister Navarro,
he asked for the Spanish people to rally around their new king, won Carlos.
And to keep the lands of Spain United,
the Spanish did give their support to Juan Carlos,
who successfully led the transition to a full democracy.
I'm aware that Francisco Franco ends the civil war remain a divisive topic to
this day in Spain. So before we end things today,
I'll ask you to kindly not turn the comments section into a rhetoric battle.
Why don't you use the comments instead to suggest another character from the
civil war, maybe on the Republican side and that's it from me.
I hope you enjoyed this video. Please do give it a thumbs up. If you enjoyed it,
please do also check out on new sister channel geographics that's linked to
below and as always, thank you for watching.